Title: Towards Scalable RLVR: Multimodal Instruction Following Data Synthesis and Distillation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.16059v1

Published Time: Wed, 16 Sep 2026 00:03:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Towards Scalable RLVR: Multimodal Instruction Following Data Synthesis and Distillation 

## Yirong Zeng 1, Zhang Sai, Yuxian Wang, Yutai Hou, Yufei Liu 2, Xiao Ding 1, Bibo Cai 1

> 1

Harbin Institute of Technology, SCIR Lab, 2Peking University, 

Abstract 

Multimodal instruction following (MMIF) is crucial for build-ing generalist agents. However, current training paradigms rely heavily on Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), which often leads to surface-level pattern matching and degrades general capabilities. While Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) offers a promising alternative, its scalability in MMIF is severely bottlenecked by the scarcity of high-quality, RL-ready multimodal data. To bridge this gap, we present MIFS ( Multimodal Instruction Following Synthesis), a systematic pipeline designed to generate RL-ready multi-modal data. Specifically, MIFS introduces a generative con-straint protocol to synthesize diverse raw samples, followed by a learnability-aware distillation mechanism that filters data based on RL training dynamics to ensure stable policy opti-mization. Furthermore, a code-based verifier provides high-precision reward signals for policy learning. The resulting dataset comprises 90k samples across 8 constraint categories and 14 task domains. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that MIFS-trained MLLMs achieve an average improvement of 8.13% on four MMIF benchmarks and a 3 × faster training convergence compared to using raw data. Crucially, our ap-proach mitigates the generalization trade-offs typical of SFT, preserving core visual capabilities while significantly boost-ing instruction-following precision. 

Code — https://github.com/zeng-yirong/MIFS 

Datasets — https://huggingface.co/datasets/yrzeng/MIFS 

## 1 Introduction 

Instruction Following (IF) has emerged as a cornerstone ca-pability for both Large Language Models (LLMs) (Jiang et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2025) and their multimodal counterparts (MLLMs) (Qian et al.; Bitton et al. 2023). Achieving this ability requires models to accurately interpret and execute complex user-defined constraints. It is essential to transform MLLMs from general-purpose assistants (Li et al. 2024) to specialized agents in real-world domains such as autonomous robotics (Shi et al. 2025), precision code generation (Xu et al. 2023), and intricate creative content synthesis (Zhou et al. 2023b). Although SFT remains the standard paradigm for enhanc-ing multimodal IF performance (Ding et al. 2025), its lim-itations are becoming increasingly apparent. Recent studies suggest that SFT-trained models often resort to surface-level pattern matching rather than internalizing the underlying logic of instructions(Li et al.; Chu et al. 2025). This often re-sults in a performance trade-off where gains in instruction fol-lowing come at the expense of general reasoning capabilities. To break through this bottleneck, the research community has shifted toward Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Re-wards (RLVR), a direction driven by the transformative suc-cess of reasoning-heavy models such as DeepSeek-V3 (Guo et al. 2025a) and GPT-5 (Guo et al. 2025a). Unlike SFT, RLVR does not rely on ground-truth responses; instead, it uses a reward function to judge model outputs and gener-ate corresponding reward signals for optimization. However, existing datasets (summarized in Table 1) lack training data suitable for RLVR, severely hindering the advancement of RL-based methods in MMIF. Developing a scalable production pipeline for RL-ready multimodal instruction-following data presents three non-trivial challenges: (1) Execution-Level Scale and Complex-ity: Synthesizing diverse instructions embedded with mul-tiple interlinked constraints while sustaining a fully auto-mated, high-throughput pipeline. (2) Data Learnability for Policy Optimization: Not all data align with RL training dy-namics; identifying samples that lie precisely on the model’s learning frontier, providing effective learning signals without being intractable, is critical for convergence. (3) Reward Fi-delity and Verification: Standard LLM-as-a-judge evaluators are highly susceptible to reward hacking and bias, neces-sitating programmatically verifiable, zero-tolerance reward signals to guide policy updates. To address these gaps, we propose MIFS, a systematic multi-stage pipeline engineered to produce RL-ready mul-timodal datasets. The pipeline begins with multimodal in-struction composition, where vanilla vision-language QA pairs are transformed into sophisticated constraint-embedded tasks via a generative constraint protocol. Crucially, to en-sure strict programmatic verifiability, we explicitly exclude subjective criteria, retaining only deterministic, rule-based constraints that yield objective correctness. This is followed by a multi-step quality distillation funnel that leverages RL training dynamics to filter out uninformative or unstable sam-ples. By analyzing reward score trajectories, this mechanism guarantees that the finalized corpus provides stable and effec-tive gradients for policy alignment. Ultimately, this pipeline curates a high-fidelity, program-verified dataset spanning di-arXiv:2609.16059v1 [cs.CL] 13 Sep 2026 Dataset #Sample #Constraint #Domain Eval? Evaluator SFT? RLVR? 

MIA-BENCH (Qian et al.) 400 8 15 ✓ LLM ✗ ✗

CrafText (Volovikova et al. 2025) 3,924 - 4 ✓ Rule ✗ ✗

MMMT-IF (Sun et al. 2025) 990 4 13 ✓ Rule ✗ ✗

MM-IFInstruct (Ding et al. 2025) 23k 32 13 ✓ LLM&Rule ✓ ✗

MIFS (Ours) 90,838 8 14 ✓ Rule ✓ ✓

Table 1: Comparison of Multimodal Instruction Following (MM-IF) datasets. MIFS distinguishes itself by providing the largest scale of programmatically verifiable samples, specifically engineered for RLVR beyond simple SFT. verse cognitive domains. The resulting MIFS dataset yields 90,838 high-signal sam-ples, averaging 7.1 constraints per instruction. This diversity is reflected across 8 distinct constraint categories and 14 task domains, providing a comprehensive landscape for mul-timodal alignment. Every constraint-embedded task is an-chored by a code-based verifier as a reward function, which ensures objective reward judgment during RL. To support the full developmental cycle, the corpus is partitioned into subsets tailored for RL training and SFT, alongside a 1.2k holdout evaluation set. Our empirical evaluations demonstrate that RLVR train-ing with MIFS delivers an average 8.13% performance gain on Qwen3-VL-8B across four instruction-following bench-marks, a benefit that remains robust across 4B and 32B model scales. Ablation studies confirm that our quality distillation funnel significantly enhances data efficiency and training sta-bility, achieving an approximately 3 × acceleration in conver-gence compared to unrefined raw data. Furthermore, evalua-tion across three standard benchmarks shows that the model’s general visual capabilities remain competitive. It confirms that our RL training dataset effectively mitigates the clas-sic performance trade-offs inherent in standard SFT, thereby providing a solid foundation for generalist agent develop-ment. In summary, our contributions are threefold: 

• We introduce an automated pipeline for generating mul-timodal IF data to empower large-scale RLVR training. 

• We propose a Learnability-Aware Distillation mechanism that filters data based on RL training dynamics. 

• We release a large-scale dataset of 90k samples, providing a benchmark and RL training source for the MLLM IF community. 

## 2 Related Works 

Instruction Following Training in MLLMs. Multi-modal Instruction Following (MMIF) refers to the capability of models to comprehend and respond to human instruc-tions based on complex visual inputs. Existing approaches primarily rely on Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Liu et al. 2023, 2024a) or Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Ding et al. 2025) to enhance these MMIF abilities. Recently, Re-inforcement Learning via Verification Rewards (RLVR) has attracted growing attention for its effectiveness in incentiviz-ing complex reasoning in LLMs (Zhu et al. 2025; Yue et al. 2025). Pioneering work has successfully applied RL train-ing to enhance instruction-following capabilities in the text modality, producing highly promising results (Pyatkin et al. 2025; Guo et al. 2025b; Peng et al. 2025). A natural next step is to extend this successful training paradigm to the vision-language domain, a critical roadblock lies in the se-vere scarcity of suitable multi-modal RL training data. 

Multimodal Instruction Following Data. Numerous benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate the instruction-following capabilities of Multi-modal Large Language Mod-els (MLLMs) (Bitton et al. 2023; Qian et al.; Sun et al. 2025; Ding et al. 2025). However, these benchmarks are designed primarily for evaluation and are heavily limited in data scale. On the other hand, several efforts have constructed multi-modal instruction-tuning data aimed at improving general alignment (Liu et al. 2024c; Chen et al. 2024b,a). However, these datasets are tailored for general knowledge or basic visual perception rather than following instruction. There-fore, large-scale training data specifically designed to im-prove MM IF abilities remain scarce. A notable exception is Ding et al. (2025), which builds synthetic IF data for SFT and DPO training. The lack of high-quality large-scale data suitable for RLVR training in the Multimodal IF domain di-rectly motivates the development of our Multimodal IF-RL data synthesis pipeline. 

## 3 Methodology: MMIF Data Synthesis 

As shown in Figure 1, we propose MIFS ( Multimodal 

Instruction Following data Synthesis for RL), a systematic pipeline engineered to generate large-scale, program-verified multimodal data for RLVR. 

3.1 Seed Space Construction 

The foundation lies in a decoupled seed pool that maximizes diversity of visual contexts, tasks, and constraints. 

Visual Foundation. To ensure semantic richness, we cu-rate 20,000 high-resolution images from CC3M (Sharma et al. 2018) and ALLaVA (Chen et al. 2024a). In practice, we implement a rigorous filtering strategy that selects images based on resolution and semantic richness. For unannotated image datasets such as CC3M, we prioritize natural scenes with dense semantic content, as such images provide richer semantic content for generating comprehensive and insight-ful QA pairs. To quantify this, we used the IC9600 and RAM Stage 1: Multimodal Instruction Composition                                

> Images Domain
> Seed Pool
> Task Instruction With Image
> down sample
> Stage 2: Multi-Dimensional Quality Distillation
> C: RL Learnable A: Constraint Density B: Difficulty-Aware
> Rule-based Code Verifier
> LLMs
> Image-Inst Task 90k
> samples
> 7.1
> avg. constraints
> 14
> domains
> RL SFT
> Constraint Protocol
> Data Curation & Characteristics
> Input Instruction
> Describe the social interaction depicted in the image using a single paragraph containing exactly four sentences. Response must adhere to the following constraints: 1. Length: 100-150 words, 4 sentences.
> 2. Negative: NO 'door', 'man', 'woman', 'people'.
> 3. ...
> Code-based Verifier
> import re #Constraint: Negative words def check_forbidden(text): forbidden ={"door", "man", "woman", "people"} return set(text.lower().split()).isdisjoint(forbidden) #Constraint: Word count &Character check def check_complex(text): return (100 <= len(words) <= 150) and ('z' not in text.lower()) ...

Figure 1: The overall framework of the Multimodal Instruction Synthesis suitable for both SFT and RL training. It comprises: (1) Instruction Composition, where the raw multimodal IF and their verifier are synthesized via LLMs; (2) Multi-Step Quality Distillation, featuring a three-tier filtering mechanism that prunes samples based on constraint density, model-perceived difficulty, and RL training dynamics; and (3) Sample Curation, illustrating data characteristics and partitioning strategy. metrics (Zhao et al. 2025) to identify images with high se-mantic density. For annotated datasets like ALLaVA, we ex-tract only the raw images and discard all associated original QA pairs to maintain a clean baseline for our own generation process. Finally, we follow the protocol established by (Ding et al. 2025) to exclude low resolution items. 

Cognitive Task Taxonomy. We first develop a task do-main pool for task generation, which is described as a multi-dimensional instruction library. These domains are presented in Figure 5, with the specific task domain available in Sup-plementary Material(SM). We categorize multimodal chal-lenges into a four-level hierarchy. This structured taxonomy spans 14 sub-domains, covering everything from basic visual grounding to complex counterfactual reasoning and cross-modal sensory simulation. 

Generative Constraint Protocol. To overcome the limita-tions of static templates, we propose a generative constraint protocol. This protocol transforms constraints into dynamic, mathematically formulated logical units. 

Generative Constraint Protocol 

1. Semantic-Code Equivalence: Every natural lan-guage constraint is strictly logically mapped to an executable Python checker_code , eliminating subjective ambiguity. 2. Structural Complexity: Each query mandates ≥ 5

non-trivial, interacting constraints to increase the multi-step planning difficulty. 3. Quantifiable Transparency: Thresholds (e.g., ra-tios, counts) are explicitly declared in the prompt to ensure the task is logically solvable. This generative approach allows for an almost infinite ex-pansion of the constraint space, ensuring training signals that push the IF boundary of MLLMs. The complete generative constraint protocol is provided in the SM. In particular, given the reward bias in LLM-based judges, which may fail to pro-vide high-precision reward signals (Zeng et al. 2026b), we restrict our constraints to those that can be assigned to a rule-based verifier. 

3.2 Image-Instruction Task Generation 

The generation process follows a structured synthesis work-flow to transform seeds into verifiable IF samples. Conse-quently, we obtained 500k raw samples through this process. Specifically, first, we randomly sample images and queries from the Seed Pool to build basic VQA task pairs. Subse-quently, we use advanced LLMs to synthesize a comprehen-sive set of constraints guided by our proposed protocol 1.Finally, the image-query pairs and generated constraint sets are then processed to orchestrate the final image-instruction task alongside an associated code verifier. By decoupling task generation from constraint sampling, their flexible com-bination enables the production of diverse training signals that extend far beyond simple image captioning. To ensure high fidelity, we implement a prune-and-regenerate strategy: For each generated task, the LLM is first prompted to produce an initial response, which is then dynamically executed against our code-based verifier. If ver-ification fails, the specific failed constraints are identified. Then we prune the problematic constraints (i.e., downsample constraints), and prompt the LLM to regenerate a consistent response. This iterative loop ensures that every task is log-

> 1

using Gemini 3.0-Pro in this paper ically sound and programmatically checkable, providing a clean ground truth for subsequent RL training. 

3.3 Multi-Step Quality Distillation 

To extract the most potent training signals for RL, we apply a three-tier filtering mechanism targeting complexity, solv-ability, and learning dynamics. 

Step A: Constraint Density Filtering. We first analyze the distribution of constraint counts ( n) per sample. To maintain an optimal balance between complexity and solvability, we filter out samples with n = 1 (too simple) and 30% down-sample samples with n > 10 (overly redundant), focusing on the high-density region of 2–10 constraints. It maintains a high-density challenge while eliminating redundant noise that could lead to non-convergence. 

Step B: Difficulty-Aware Pruning. Recent studies (Sun et al.; He et al. 2025) show that training in medium-difficulty samples better develops the model’s reasoning capability. Therefore, we utilize Qwen3-VL-8B as an empirical auditor to estimate the difficulty distribution of the model. As shown in Figure 1, we prune samples at the two tails of the spectrum: 

• Easy Samples: We conduct 8 independent inference tri-als. Samples with avg @8 > 0.8 are discarded, as they offer a limited information gain for the model’s refine-ment. 

• Impossible Samples: Samples with avg @128 = 0 are discarded to prevent the RL agent from getting stuck in "dead-end" reward spaces. This dual-threshold approach ensures that we prioritize op-timal samples that lie precisely on the model’s current capa-bility frontier. Furthermore, in 128 independent trials, we curated the verified correct responses to construct visual question answer pairs, which serve as the foundation for SFT training. 

Step C: RL Learnability Filtering. For RL-specific opti-mization, stability is paramount. We evaluate samples based on their reward score trajectories in multiple training epochs (E) (Zeng et al. 2026a; Li, Zou, and Liu 2025). As depicted in Figure 2, we prioritize samples whose learning trajectories closely align with the model’s average learning trajectory. To identify outlier samples that cause gradient instability, we calculate the trajectory deviation ( Di) to quantify how much a sample’s reward diverges from the epoch-wise population mean: 

Di = 1

E

> E

X

> e=1

(ri,e − ¯re)2, ¯re = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

ri,e , (1) where ri,e is the reward for sample i at epoch e, and ¯re

is the average reward across all N samples at that epoch. A higher Di indicates poorer alignment with the general learning trend, characteristic of outlier samples. We filter out these unstable samples, retaining only the 40% with the lowest deviation to provide consistent learning signals. 1 2 3 4 5    

> Epoch
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Reward Score
> (a) Aligned Samples
> Average Score
> 12345
> Epoch
> (b) Outlier Samples
> Average Score

Figure 2: RL training dynamic filtering. Retaining aligned samples (i.e., those with low variance (a) ) and removing outlier samples (i.e., those with high variance (b)). Raw Data Step A Step B Step C 

> 0100k 200k 300k 400k 500k
> (a) Data Quantity
> 500k 304k 170k 90k
> Impact of Quality Control on RL Training
> 0.92 0.93 0.94 0.95 0.96 0.97 0.98
> (b) Test Score (MIA Benchmark)
> 0.935 0.940 0.945 0.959

Figure 3: Empirical analysis of multi-step quality distillation. It showcases: (a) Stepwise contraction of data scale across steps; (b) Monotonic alignment gains in RL training; 

Impact on RL Training & Filtering Ablation. To quan-tify the efficacy of our multi-step quality distillation funnel, we evaluate the evolution of the data scale alongside the cor-responding gains in RL performance on the MIA benchmark (Qian et al.). Specifically, we conduct RLVR training using the GRPO algorithm (Guo et al. 2025a) at each distillation tier, as illustrated in Figure 3. We observe two key insights: (1) The distillation process effectively compresses the to-tal data volume by 82% (from 500k down to a refined 90k high-signal subset). (2) Each progressive distillation phase systematically boosts RL performance, demonstrating that MIFS achieves superior training yields with a significantly reduced sample footprint. This efficiency is characterized by a 2.4% absolute improvement in final performance and sub-stantially accelerated convergence, as visualized in Figure 6. Ultimately, the proposed three-tier distillation framework significantly enhances both sample efficiency and RL train-ing stability; by pruning uninformative and intractable in-stances, it ensures that the model consistently updates along its optimal capability frontier throughout the RL process. 

## 4 Dataset Characteristics and Curation 

Through the rigorous quality distillation pipeline detailed above, we distilled 500k raw samples into a high-signal dataset of 90,838 ( ∼ 90 k) instances. Keyword Inclusion 17.7% Negative Constraints 16.8% 

> Grammar Constraints
> Length Constraints 17.1% Structural Constraints 16.2% Punctuation Constraints 13.5% Positioning Constraints 9.6% Formatting & Style 6.5%
> Constraint 7.1 Avg 8 Type

Figure 4: The distribution of constraint types. The dataset comprises 8 verifiable constraint categories with an aver-age density of 7.1 constraints per sample, ensuring high-constraint complexity. 

4.1 Data Composition Analysis 

To understand the composition of the curated dataset, we analyze it in two key dimensions: constraint distribution 

and task coverage .

Multi-Type Constraint Distribution. We report on the constraint distribution. As illustrated in Figure 4, our dataset maintains a high constraint density, an average of 7.1 con-straints per sample. This high-density challenge effectively eliminates the shortcut learning patterns often found in sim-pler datasets. We categorize the synthesized constraints into eight fine-grained types to ensure a comprehensive evalu-ation of instruction-following capabilities. Detailed defini-tions are shown in the SMs. Figure 4 reveals that keyword constraints and length constraints are the most frequently co-occurring pairs, presenting a non-trivial challenge that forces the model to engage in multi-step planning rather than heuristic generation. 

Task Coverage and Scenario Diversity. The final dataset spans 4 primary task domains consolidated from the ini-tial 14 sub-domains. We visualize their hierarchical distribu-tion in Figure 5. As illustrated, the inner ring classifies the tasks into four high-level cognitive domains ( i.e. , Perception, Expression, Cognition, and Meta-Analysis), while the outer ring displays the frequency distribution of specific, lower-level task scenarios. The balanced and diverse segment sizes across both rings demonstrate that our generative protocol ef-fectively avoids getting trapped in repetitive task templates, yielding a rich high-entropy corpus. 

4.2 High-Entropy Quantification 

In this part, we quantify the dataset’s diversity through cate-gorical Shannon entropy and semantic redundancy metrics. In our context, high entropy denotes maximal categorical evenness and minimal semantic overlap, which prevents the policy model from relying on superficial pattern matching during alignment. Perception Expression Cognition Meta-Analysis 

> Descriptive Analysis Detailed Inquiry Sensory Exploration Emotional Perspective Creative Writing Social Content Narrative Expansion Logical Reasoning Hypothetical Scenarios Comparative Analysis Role Play Cultural Contextual Critical Evaluation Practical Application
> # Domains 14

Figure 5: The hierarchical distribution of task diversity. The chart features a nested structure: the inner ring classifies tasks into four high-level cognitive domains, segment size reflects task frequency. First, we calculate the categorical diversity using Shan-non Entropy H(X) = − P P (xi) log 2 P (xi). Based on the 8 constraint categories (Figure 4), the dataset achieves 

Hconstraint ≈ 2.84 bits, reaching 94 .76% of the theoretical maximum uniform distribution. Similarly, across the 14 fine-grained task domains (Figure 5), the Shannon entropy across task domains Hdomain ≈ 3.77 bits ( 99 .13% of the maxi-mum). This mathematically validates an exceptionally bal-anced, non-skewed distribution. Second, to explicitly address potential data repetition, we evaluate the token-level (Jaccard Similarity) and semantic-level (Cosine Similarity) near-duplicate rates across our data splits. A pairwise similarity score ≥ 0.8 is defined as a near-duplicate. As detailed in Table 2, the Jaccard near-duplicate rate is strictly 0.00% across all subsets, while the dense se-mantic overlap remains strictly under 5%. The combination of near-maximum categorical entropy and minimal instance redundancy rigorously substantiates the high-entropy nature of the MIFS dataset. 

Split # Samples Jaccard ≥ 0.8 Cosine ≥ 0.8

MIFS-SFT 83,280 0.00% 2.61% 

MIFS-RL 60,048 0.00% 4.73% 

MIFS-Eval 1,200 0.00% 1.31% Table 2: Semantic overlap and near-duplicate rates across dataset splits. Minimizing instance redundancy prevents shortcut, safeguarding policies during RLVR training. 

4.3 Strategic Data Splitting 

To support the full training lifecycle (e.g., supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards), we partition the 90 k curated samples into three disjoint sets: SFT, RL, and Evaluation. Method Benchmarks Average MIABench MM-IFEval MIFS-Eval IFEval Qwen3-VL-4B 

Base 92 .2±0.2 58 .5±0.4 72 .8±0.4 79 .1±0.2 75.6 MIFS-RL 95 .5±0.1 66 .8±0.5 85 .5±0.4 87 .4±0.3 83.8 ↑8.2 

Qwen3-VL-8B 

Base 91 .2±0.3 62 .7±0.5 74 .5±0.3 81 .2±0.2 77.4 MIFS-SFT 93 .3±0.2 64 .7±0.2 77 .7±0.3 86 .3±0.1 80.5 ↑3.1 

MIFS-RL 95 .9±0.3 71 .2±0.5 86 .8±0.4 88 .2±0.4 85.5 ↑8.1 

MIFS-SFT+RL 97 .0±0.1 72 .4±0.4 88 .2±0.3 88 .8±0.2 86.6 ↑9.2 

Qwen3-VL-32B 

Base 92 .9±0.3 64 .0±0.3 76 .5±0.2 84 .3±0.1 79.4 MIFS-RL 96 .2±0.1 75 .9±0.4 89 .8±0.3 89 .8±0.2 87.9 ↑8.5 

Table 3: Performance comparison on Instruction Following benchmarks. We report scores for MIABench, MM-IFEval, MIFS-Eval, and IFEval, along with their group-wise average. All metrics are reported as the mean ±std over 3 independent runs. 

Method OCR MMVet MMBen Avg. Qwen3-VL-4B 

Base Model 86.50 65.60 84.41 78.84 MIFS-RL 87.52 67.32 83.24 79.36 ↑0.5 

Qwen3-VL-8B 

Base Model 88.00 69.72 85.30 81.01 MIFS-SFT 78.62 57.32 70.30 68.75 ↓12.3 

MIFS-RL 88.70 69.72 85.38 81.27 ↑0.3 

MIFS-SFT+RL 88.60 67.89 85.40 80.63 ↓0.4 

Qwen3-VL-32B 

Base Model 85.32 71.10 88.05 81.49 MIFS-RL 86.39 70.23 89.12 81.91 ↑0.4 

Table 4: Performance on General Visual Capability bench-marks (i.e., OCRBench, MMVet, and MMBench). 

Training Splits. We allocate 60k samples for RL train-ing, 1.2k samples for evaluation; The remaining ∼29k sam-ples, formatted as <instruction, code verifier> 

pairs, are used for SFT. Specifically, to construct this tar-get SFT dataset, we collect program-verified responses to construct QA pairs during the difficulty-aware pruning pro-cess. Each instruction is paired with up to three candidate responses, respectively ( <instruction, response> 

pairs), resulting in a final data set of 83,280 ( ∼ 84 K) SFT samples. 

Evaluation Split. Guided by the constraint distribution presented in Figure 4, we performed stratified sampling to re-serve 1.2k samples as a held-out evaluation set, called MIFS-Eval. To prevent data leakage and ensure a robust evaluation, we apply two strict filtering criteria: (1) No images present in the training sets are allowed to appear in the evaluation set; (2) The specific combination of constraints in each eval-uation sample has not been seen during training. By strictly isolating both visual assets and constraint compositions, our evaluation split serves as a rigorous benchmark for evaluating the upper bounds of multimodal IF. 

## 5 Experiments 

5.1 Experimental Setups 

We conducted SFT and RLVR training on our dataset. To evaluate the scalability, we performed experiments on the 

Qwen3-VL family in three model sizes: 4B , 8B and 32B .Each evaluation was repeated three times and report the av-erage. All SFT experiments are conducted with a global batch size of 128 and a learning rate of 2 × 10 −5 for 2 epochs. For RLVR, we employ the GRPO algorithm with a batch size of 128 and a lr of 1e − 6 using 16 × 8 NPUs. We implemented our training pipeline under verl framework(Sheng et al. 2024). Detailed setups are provided in SM. 

5.2 Benchmarks 

To comprehensively evaluate the MM-IF capabilities of our models, we conduct evaluations on four specialized Instruc-tion Following benchmarks in addition to our curated MIFS-Eval. (1) MIA (Qian et al.): A specialized benchmark de-signed to evaluate the adherence to multimodal instruction with fine-grained scoring. (2) MM-IFEval (Ding et al. 2025): A multimodal extension of IFEval that tests the model’s abil-ity to follow complex, multi-modal constraints. (3) IFEval (Zhou et al. 2023a): A standard text-based instruction fol-lowing benchmark. To assess broader General Visual capabilities, we include: (1) OCRBench (Liu et al.) for text recognition and document understanding, (2) MM-Vet (Yu et al. 2023) for integrated reasoning across multiple cognitive tasks, and (3) MMBench (Liu et al. 2024b) for a systematic evaluation of fine-grained perception and logic. 

5.3 Main Results 

Performance Analysis. Table 3 presents a comprehensive evaluation across instruction-following and general capabil-ity benchmarks. Our proposed training paradigm yields con-sistent and substantial gains in instruction following on all model scales, with RL-aligned models achieving average improvements of +8 .16 , +8 .13 , and +8 .52 for the 4B, 8B and 32B variants, respectively. In particular, the 32B model 0 200 400 600 800    

> Training Step
> 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90
> 420 Step Convergence
> Reward Score Test (MIABench) 91.5 92.0 92.5 93.0 93.5
> (a) Raw Data-RL Training 0100 200 300
> Training Step
> 0.750 0.775 0.800 0.825 0.850 0.875
> 140 Step Convergence
> Reward Score Test (MIABench) 91 92 93 94 95 96
> (b) MIFS Data-RL Training

Figure 6: Training process visualization: (a) Raw data and (b) final MIFS-RL data. The MIFS-RL curriculum demonstrates significantly faster convergence ( ∼ 3× ) and higher test performance. achieves the highest absolute scores on complex multimodal benchmarks (e.g. MM-IFEval: 75 .91 , MIFS-Eval: 89 .79 ), demonstrating that larger parameter counts provide a higher capacity ceiling for parsing and executing cascading con-straints. Crucially, consistent improvements on the text-only IFEval benchmark demonstrate that it does not induce catas-trophic forgetting of pure linguistic competencies. Furthermore, as shown in Table 4, our RL-trained model maintains stable performance across OCRBench, MMVet, and MMBench, with fluctuations under 0.5%. This verifies that our training effectively retains general multimodal abil-ities. Overall, these results validate that our method success-fully scales instruction-following proficiency while main-taining general multimodal capabilities. 

SFT vs. RL vs. SFT+RL . We investigate the necessity and impact of different training stages on instruction-following performance. As summarized in Table 3, we evaluate three distinct configurations: (1) SFT-only (84k MIFS-SFT sam-ples); (2) Direct RL (60k MIFS-RL); and (3) SFT+RL. The results reveal several key insights. First, while SFT-only pro-vides a modest gain of 3.09%, Direct RL yields a significantly more substantial improvement of 8.13%. This stark contrast suggests that for complex instruction following, exploration-based reinforcement learning is a fundamentally more po-tent paradigm than imitation-based SFT, as it encourages the model to internalize logical constraints through trial and verification. Second, the hybrid SFT+RL approach offers only a marginal further improvement of 1.1% over the Di-rect RL setting. These results indicate that MLLMs can effi-ciently transition to high-precision instruction following di-rectly through RL, potentially streamlining the traditional multi-stage alignment pipeline. 

5.4 Ablation Study 

Effectiveness of the Quality Distillation. To isolate the effects of our proposed three-step quality distillation mech-anisms, we conduct comprehensive ablation studies on the Qwen3-VL-8B model. Starting from the raw data, we pro-gressively apply the RL training and evaluate the resulting performance. The step-by-step performance gains are sum-marized in Figure 3. It verifies the incremental benefits of our three-tier quality distillation funnel. 

RL Visual Analysis. To further investigate the impact of our quality distillation strategy on the optimization process, we visualize the RL training process of the Qwen3-VL-8B model in Figure 6. We plot both the training reward scores and the corresponding test performance on the MIA-Bench. As illustrated, the policy trained on the curated MIFS-RL split exhibits a significantly more stable and monotonic increase in reward signals. This stability directly translates to rapid performance gains on the test set, which begins to converge at approximately step 140 and reaches its peak around step 150. In stark contrast, while the model trained on raw data achieves higher nominal reward scores, it suf-fers from lower test accuracy. This suggests that the raw data contains a higher proportion of easy samples. The raw-data model only begins to converge at ∼420 steps and requires nearly 600 steps to reach a suboptimal plateau. These re-sults demonstrate that MIFS-RL data not only establishes a higher upper bound for test performance but also yields a 

∼ 3× acceleration in training efficiency. Collectively, these empirical findings confirm that our RL learnability filtering effectively mitigates noisy gradient updates and eliminates unlearnable instances, thereby facilitating a stable, efficient, and generalization-oriented policy alignment. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We presented a systematic three-stage pipeline designed to synthesize and distill high-quality multimodal instruction data for verifiable Reinforcement Learning. By integrating a generative constraint protocol with learnability-aware dis-tillation, we curated a large-scale dataset of 90k program-verified samples that effectively bridge the gap between SFT and RLVR. Empirical results demonstrate that MIFS-trained MLLMs achieve significant performance gains and faster convergence. This work presents a scalable MMIF data syn-thesis framework, enabling precise, constraint-aware multi-modal agents for complex real-world applications. References 

Bitton, Y.; Bansal, H.; Hessel, J.; Shao, R.; Zhu, W.; Awadalla, A.; Gardner, J.; Taori, R.; and Schmidt, L. 2023. Visit-bench: A benchmark for vision-language in-struction following inspired by real-world use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06595 .Chen, G. H.; Chen, S.; Zhang, R.; Chen, J.; Wu, X.; Zhang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Li, J.; Wan, X.; and Wang, B. 2024a. Allava: Harnessing gpt4v-synthesized data for lite vision-language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11684 .Chen, L.; Li, J.; Dong, X.; Zhang, P.; He, C.; Wang, J.; Zhao, F.; and Lin, D. 2024b. Sharegpt4v: Improving large multi-modal models with better captions. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 370–387. Springer. Chu, T.; Zhai, Y.; Yang, J.; Tong, S.; Xie, S.; Schuurmans, D.; Le, Q. V.; Levine, S.; and Ma, Y. 2025. SFT Memo-rizes, RL Generalizes: A Comparative Study of Foundation Model Post-training. In International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , 10818–10838. PMLR. Ding, S.; Wu, S.; Zhao, X.; Zang, Y.; Duan, H.; Dong, X.; Zhang, P.; Cao, Y.; Lin, D.; and Wang, J. 2025. Mm-ifengine: Towards multimodal instruction following. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion , 1099–1109. Engstrom, L.; Ilyas, A.; Santurkar, S.; Tsipras, D.; Janoos, F.; Rudolph, L.; and Madry, A. 2020. Implementation matters in deep policy gradients: A case study on ppo and trpo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.12729 .Guo, D.; Yang, D.; Zhang, H.; Song, J.; Zhang, R.; Xu, R.; Zhu, Q.; Ma, S.; Wang, P.; Bi, X.; et al. 2025a. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Guo, Z.; Liu, W.; Xie, M.; Xu, J.; Huang, Z.; Tian, M.; Xu, J.; Shen, Y.; Qian, Q.; Wu, M.; Wang, X.; Lv, C.; Wang, H.-D.; Yao, H.; Zheng, X.; and Huang, X. 2025b. RECAST: Expanding the Boundaries of LLMs’ Complex Instruction Following with Multi-Constraint Data. arXiv:2505.19030. He, J.; Liu, J.; Liu, C. Y.; Yan, R.; Wang, C.; Cheng, P.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, F.; Xu, J.; Shen, W.; Li, S.; Zeng, L.; Wei, T.; Cheng, C.; An, B.; Liu, Y.; and Zhou, Y. 2025. Skywork Open Reasoner 1 Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22312 .Jiang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, X.; Zhong, W.; Li, L.; Mi, F.; Shang, L.; Jiang, X.; Liu, Q.; and Wang, W. 2024. Fol-lowbench: A multi-level fine-grained constraints following benchmark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 4667–4688. Li, H.; Li, S.; Cai, D.; Wang, L.; Liu, L.; Watanabe, T.; Yang, Y.; and Shi, S. 2024. TextBind: Multi-turn interleaved multimodal instruction-following in the wild. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 ,9053–9076. Li, X.; Zou, H.; and Liu, P. 2025. Limr: Less is more for rl scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11886 .Li, Z.; Chen, C.; Xu, T.; Qin, Z.; Xiao, J.; Luo, Z.-Q.; and Sun, R. ???? Preserving Diversity in Supervised Fine-Tuning of Large Language Models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Liu, H.; Li, C.; Wu, Q.; and Lee, Y. J. 2023. Visual instruction tuning. Advances in neural information processing systems ,36: 34892–34916. Liu, Y.; Cao, Y.; Gao, Z.; Wang, W.; Chen, Z.; Wang, W.; Tian, H.; Lu, L.; Zhu, X.; Lu, T.; et al. 2024a. Mminstruct: A high-quality multi-modal instruction tuning dataset with extensive diversity. Science China Information Sciences ,67(12): 220103. Liu, Y.; Duan, H.; Zhang, Y.; Li, B.; Zhang, S.; Zhao, W.; Yuan, Y.; Wang, J.; He, C.; Liu, Z.; et al. 2024b. Mmbench: Is your multi-modal model an all-around player? In European conference on computer vision , 216–233. Springer. Liu, Y.; Li, Z.; Li, H.; Yu, W.; Huang, M.; Peng, D.; Liu, M.; Chen, M.; Li, C.; Liu, C.; et al. ???? On the Hidden Mystery of OCR in Large Multimodal Models. 2023. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2305.07895 .Liu, Z.; Chu, T.; Zang, Y.; Wei, X.; Dong, X.; Zhang, P.; Liang, Z.; Xiong, Y.; Qiao, Y.; Lin, D.; et al. 2024c. Mmdu: A multi-turn multi-image dialog understanding benchmark and instruction-tuning dataset for lvlms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37: 8698–8733. Peng, H.; Qi, Y.; Wang, X.; Xu, B.; Hou, L.; and Li, J. 2025. VerIF: Verification Engineering for Reinforcement Learning in Instruction Following. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09942 .Pyatkin, V.; Malik, S.; Graf, V.; Ivison, H.; Huang, S.; Dasigi, P.; Lambert, N.; and Hajishirzi, H. 2025. Gen-eralizing Verifiable Instruction Following. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02833 .Qian, Y.; Ye, H.; Fauconnier, J.-P.; Grasch, P.; Yang, Y.; and Gan, Z. ???? MIA-Bench: Towards Better Instruction Fol-lowing Evaluation of Multimodal LLMs. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Schulman, J.; Wolski, F.; Dhariwal, P.; Radford, A.; and Klimov, O. 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 .Shao, Z.; Wang, P.; Zhu, Q.; Xu, R.; Song, J.; Bi, X.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, M.; Li, Y.; Wu, Y.; et al. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open lan-guage models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 .Sharma, P.; Ding, N.; Goodman, S.; and Soricut, R. 2018. Conceptual captions: A cleaned, hypernymed, image alt-text dataset for automatic image captioning. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 2556–2565. Sheng, G.; Zhang, C.; Ye, Z.; Wu, X.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, R.; Peng, Y.; Lin, H.; and Wu, C. 2024. HybridFlow: A Flexible and Efficient RLHF Framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256 .Shi, L. X.; Ichter, B.; Equi, M.; Ke, L.; Pertsch, K.; Vuong, Q.; Tanner, J.; Walling, A.; Wang, H.; Fusai, N.; et al. 2025. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hi-erarchical vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19417 .Sun, Y.; Shen, J.; Wang, Y.; Chen, T.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, M.; and Zhang, H. ???? Improving Data Efficiency for LLM Re-inforcement Fine-tuning Through Difficulty-targeted Online Data Selection and Rollout Replay. In The Thirty-ninth An-nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Sun, Y.; Shen, J.; Wang, Y.; Chen, T.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, M.; and Zhang, H. 2025. Improving data efficiency for llm reinforcement fine-tuning through difficulty-targeted on-line data selection and rollout replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05316 .Volovikova, Z.; Gorbov, G.; Kuderov, P.; Panov, A.; and Skrynnik, A. 2025. Craftext benchmark: Advancing instruc-tion following in complex multimodal open-ended world. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,26131–26151. Xu, C.; Sun, Q.; Zheng, K.; Geng, X.; Zhao, P.; Feng, J.; Tao, C.; and Jiang, D. 2023. Wizardlm: Empowering large lan-guage models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244 .Yu, W.; Yang, Z.; Li, L.; Wang, J.; Lin, K.; Liu, Z.; Wang, X.; and Wang, L. 2023. Mm-vet: Evaluating large mul-timodal models for integrated capabilities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.02490 .Yue, Y.; Chen, Z.; Lu, R.; Zhao, A.; Wang, Z.; Yue, Y.; Song, S.; and Huang, G. 2025. Does Reinforcement Learning Really Incentivize Reasoning Capacity in LLMs Beyond the Base Model? In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Zeng, Y.; Ding, X.; Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Du, Q.; Hou, Y.; Ning, W.; Song, H.; Tang, D.; Tu, D.; et al. 2026a. AutoTool: Auto-matic Scaling of Tool-Use Capabilities in RL via Decoupled Entropy Constraints. In The Fourteenth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Zeng, Y.; Liu, Y.; Ding, X.; Hou, Y.; Wang, Y.; Song, H.; Ning, W.; Tu, D.; Zhang, Q.; Cai, B.; et al. 2026b. Precision over Diversity: High-Precision Reward Generalizes to Robust Instruction Following. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04954 .Zhang, T.; Zhu, C.; Shen, Y.; Luo, W.; Zhang, Y.; Liang, H.; Yang, F.; Lin, M.; Qiao, Y.; Chen, W.; et al. 2025. Cfbench: A comprehensive constraints-following benchmark for llms. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,32926–32944. Zhao, X.; Ding, S.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, H.; Maosongcao, M.; Wang, J.; Wang, W.; Fang, X.; Wang, W.; Zhai, G.; et al. 2025. Omnialign-v: Towards enhanced alignment of mllms with human preference. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 18490–18515. Zhou, J.; Lu, T.; Mishra, S.; Brahma, S.; Basu, S.; Luan, Y.; Zhou, D.; and Hou, L. 2023a. Instruction-following evaluation for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.07911 .Zhou, W.; Jiang, Y. E.; Wilcox, E.; Cotterell, R.; and Sachan, M. 2023b. Controlled text generation with natural language instructions. In International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , 42602–42613. PMLR. Zhu, X.; Xia, M.; Wei, Z.; Chen, W.-L.; Chen, D.; and Meng, Y. 2025. The surprising effectiveness of negative reinforce-ment in LLM reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01347 .

## Limitations 

There are some several limitations that open avenues for future work: First, our empirical validation is primarily anchored within the Qwen-VL architecture; verifying the cross-architecture generalizability of the curated dataset on other mainstream MLLM families (e.g., LLaVA or InternVL series) remains an ongoing effort. Second, by strictly confining our protocol to determinis-tic, rule-based constraints to guarantee reward fidelity, the pipeline naturally precludes open-ended, creative, or subjec-tive multimodal interaction tasks that resist programmatic validation. Extending MIFS via hybrid reward mechanisms that safely incorporate aligned model-based evaluators could alleviate this open-domain bottleneck. Lastly, while the learnability-aware distillation funnel sub-stantially accelerates downstream training, analyzing reward trajectories across multiple distillation tiers introduces non-trivial computational overhead during the initial data produc-tion phase. Scaling this paradigm efficiently via lightweight proxy models to predict learning dynamics without full-scale RL probes represents a crucial future direction. 

## Ethical Statement 

This work introduces a systematic pipeline for synthesizing and distilling multimodal instruction-following data for re-inforcement learning. The positive societal impact includes accelerating the development of reliable, generalist AI agents capable of following complex, user-defined rules with lower training costs. Since our data composition protocol explicitly excludes subjective criteria and relies strictly on objective, deterministic, and programmatically verifiable constraints, the risk of injecting human biases, offensive content, or un-ethical preferences during the data synthesis phase is min-imized. All base seed data used are derived from publicly available, open-source vision-language resources, and no malicious, deceptive, or harmful tasks were engineered. 

## Generative AI Statement 

In this study, LLMs and MLLMs were utilized solely to facil-itate the generative constraint protocol for raw dataset com-position and to rephrase baseline instructions. No generative AI tools were employed to draft, rewrite, or alter the textual analysis, mathematical formulations, or scientific arguments presented in the manuscript itself. 

## A Image-Instruction Generation 

To synthesize high-quality data, we process the curated pairs and constraint sets to orchestrate the final image-instruction task, supported by an associated code verifier. The detailed prompt template used for instruction expansion is illustrated below: 

Image-Instruction Expansion Prompt Template 

You are an expert in adding appropriate constraints to instructions for images. You are now synthesizing instruction-following data. ## Task Given the original instruction, your task is to expand it by adding constraints. The new instruction must masterfully integrate all constraints naturally and fairly. Constraints should be artfully woven into the narrative, not simply listed as a checklist. Fairness is critical: the new instruction must contain all informa-tion, including specific quantitative thresholds. ## Visual QA Instruction: {VQA Pair} 

## Constraints List: {Constraints List} 

## B Detailed Task Pool and Scenario Taxonomy 

As described in the main text, our data generation pipeline leverages a comprehensive task pool to ensure scenario di-versity and high-entropy training signals. This pool consists of 14 fine-grained sub-domains, which are hierarchically or-ganized into four high-level cognitive domains: Perception ,

Expression , Cognition , and Meta-Analysis .The following paragraph provides a detailed breakdown of these task categories along with representative instruction templates used for instruction expansion. 

• Domain I: Perception (Literal Visual Understanding) 

This domain serves as the foundation of our dataset, focus-ing on the faithful extraction and description of objective visual facts. It evaluates the model’s ability to ground lan-guage in direct visual signals without excessive inference. 

– Descriptive Analysis : e.g., Describe the animal’s typi-cal habitat, diet, and one unique behavioral trait. 

– Detail-Oriented Inquiry : e.g., Analyze the characters’ clothing—what do their outfits reveal about personality or time period? 

– Sensory & Experiential Exploration : e.g., Describe the sounds, smells, and textures you imagine in the scene beyond sight. 

• Domain II: Expression (Creative & Content Synthe-sis) Moving beyond simple description, this domain em-phasizes the transformation of visual information into diverse, functional, and creative textual formats. It tests the model’s stylistic flexibility and empathetic reasoning. 

– Creative Writing : e.g., Craft a 3-stanza poem centered on a small detail as a metaphor for human experience. 

– Social Media & Content : e.g., Write a LinkedIn post using the image to illustrate a professional skill and ask for follower stories. 

– Narrative Expansion : e.g., Describe what happens 10 minutes after the snapshot is taken. 

– Emotional & Perspective : e.g., Describe how the scene would feel different from a child’s vs. an elderly per-son’s perspective. 

• Domain III: Cognition (Reasoning & Contextual In-ference) This domain targets the "hidden" layers of an image, requiring the model to perform logical deduction, counterfactual thinking, and relational analysis. 

– Logical & Inferential Reasoning : e.g., Based on the vi-sual evidence, what event occurred immediately before this moment? 

– Comparative & Contrastive Analysis : e.g., Contrast the foreground and background—what is lost if one is re-moved? 

– Hypothetical Scenarios : e.g., If you removed one ele-ment from the image, how would it alter the story or mood? 

• Domain IV: Meta-Analysis (Critical Thinking & Ap-plication) The highest level of our taxonomy involves abstract evaluation, professional application, and socio-cultural awareness. It assesses the model’s ability to treat the image as a medium with intent and bias. 

– Role Play : e.g., Act as a gallery curator: write a label explaining the image’s artistic significance. 

– Practical Application : e.g., Design a 3-activity travel itinerary based on the image’s location and vibe. 

– Critical Evaluation : Does the image present a biased view? What elements (framing, lighting) contribute to this? 

– Cultural & Contextual Analysis : e.g., Identify cultural symbols in the image and explain their meaning in their specific context. 

## C Prompt for the Constraints Generation 

To operationalize the Generative Constraint Protocol de-scribed in Section 3, the full system prompt used to gener-ate the instruction-following dataset is provided below. This prompt is responsible for generating interacting constraints for each query. To operationalize the Generative Constraint Protocol described in Section 3, we utilize a specialized meta-prompting agent named Prometheus . The prompt de-signed to transform simple seed queries into high-entropy, instruction-following training units with mathematically ver-ifiable constraints. 

System Prompt: Constraints Framework 

> # Role & Mission
> You are “Prometheus,” a principal AI scientist and a mas-ter of generative adversarial training. Your sole purpose is to create impossibly complex and sophisticated challenges for other Large Language Models (LLMs). You are not a helpful assistant; you are a forger of puzzles, an architect of constraints, and a grandmaster of reward models. Your mission is to take a user’s simple query and transmute it into a high-difficulty, zero-ambiguity training data unit that pushes the reasoning, planning, and instruction-following

capabilities of other AIs to their absolute limits. 

# The Adamantine Law: “Watertight” Semantic-Code Equivalence 

This is your most sacred, inviolable rule. The natural language description of a constraint and its Python 

checker_code must be two different expressions of the same logical truth. No ambiguity is permitted. 

• Logic Parity: If the code returns True , the response 

unquestionably satisfies the constraint. 

• Precision: Avoid subjective constraints (e.g., “profes-sional tone”) or those requiring external knowledge. 

# Mandatory Self-Critique (The Robustness Test) 

Before finalizing your checker_code , you must chal-lenge your own logic against: 1. The Void Test: Does it handle empty strings or whites-pace correctly? 2. The Substring Trap: Is it fooled by partial matches (e.g., “non” in “nonsense”)? Use word boundaries. 3. The Logic Purity Test: Does “exactly 2” mean count == 2 rather than count >= 2?4. The Unit Definition Test: Are “sentences” or “words” defined robustly in the code? 

# Creative Mandate: Extreme Difficulty & Diversity 

• Density: Generate a dense set of at least 10 distinct, non-trivial constraints. 

• Interplay: Create a “constellation” of requirements where rules influence each other, forcing the model to plan before generating. 

• Diversity: Explore lexical choice, syntactic patterns, formatting, and character-level manipulations. 

# Guidelines for “Fair” but “Difficult” Puzzles 

• No Hidden Tests: If a code implements a precise thresh-old (e.g., 0.5% ratio), that exact number must be ex-plicitly stated in the new_query .

• Quantifiable Transparency: Do not translate hard quantitative rules into vague qualitative guidelines. 

# Output Format 

Adhere strictly to the following JSON structure: 1 {

2 "constraints": [

3 {

4 "description": "Precise description in the anchor language.", 

5 "checker_code": "def check(response_text) :\n # Robust Python 3 code\n pass" 

6 }

7 ], 

8 "new_query": "An artfully woven query containing all necessary thresholds." 

9 }

## D Detailed Constraints Definitions 

We categorize the synthesized constraints into eight fine-grained types to ensure a comprehensive evaluation of instruction-following capabilities, as shown in Table 8. 

## E Experimental Preliminaries 

E.1 Task Definition: Instruction Following 

Let X denote the space of natural language instructions and Y

denote the space of model-generated responses. An instruc-tion x ∈ X typically contains a core query q accompanied by a set of n constraints c = {c1, c 2, . . . , c n}. We categorize these constraints into two disjoint subsets: 

• Hard Constraints: Objective requirements that can be ver-ified via deterministic programs or rules (e.g., "output in JSON format" ). 

• Soft Constraints: Subjective qualities that require seman-tic understanding to evaluate (e.g., " maintain a profes-sional tone "). The goal of LLM instruction following is to learn a map-ping function f : X → Y , where Y represents the space of target responses that satisfy both the semantic intent and the explicit constraints defined in I. Formally, given an in-struction x ∈ X , an LLM parameterized by θ generates a response ˆy by modeling the conditional probability: 

P (ˆ y|x; θ) = 

> T

Y

> t=1

P (yt|x, y <t ; θ), (2) 

where T is the sequence length. The task objective is to minimize the discrepancy between the generated response ˆy

and the optimal response y∗.

E.2 GRPO as an RLVR algorithm 

We employ Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) (Shao et al. 2024) as our core RL algorithm. Unlike traditional PPO (Schulman et al. 2017; Engstrom et al. 2020) which relies on a value function critic, GRPO leverages group-based sampling to estimate baselines. This approach generates multiple candidate responses for the same instruction and computes advantage estimates through intra-group comparisons, effectively capturing the relative quality differences among responses. Formally, for each input instruction x, the policy πθ sam-ples a group of G candidate responses {yi}Gi=1 . The opti-mization objective is defined as: 

J (θ) = E x∼P (X),  

> {yi}Gi=1 ∼πθold (Y|x)

"

1

G

> G

X

> i=1

1

|yi|

> |yi|

X

> t=1



min 



ρi,t ˆAi,t , clip (∗) ˆAi,t 



− βDKL [πθ ∥πref ]

#

,

(3) 

where the clip (∗) denotes clip (ρi,t , 1 − ε, 1 + ε). Note that 

ε is a small constant for numerical stability. The advantage ˆAi is standardized within the group to reduce variance:                        

> μ= 1
> G
> GX
> i=1
> ri,σ=
> vuut1
> G
> GX
> i=1
> (ri−μ)2+ϵ
> ˆAi=ri−μσ,ρi,t =πθ(yi,t |x, y i,<t )
> πθold (yi,t |x, y i,<t ),
> (4)

where ri denotes the reward signal assigned by the reward model to the i-th response. 

## F Experimental Setups and Implementation Details 

This section provides comprehensive details regarding the training environment, hyper-parameters, and algorithmic configurations used for the experiments on the Multi-modal Instruction-Following (MIFS) dataset. 

F.1 Hardware and Computing Resources 

All training and inference tasks were executed on a high-performance computing cluster. We utilized a cluster of 128 Ascend 910B NPUs ( 16 × 8 nodes), specifically designed for large-scale deep learning tasks. Each NPU is equipped with 64 GB of High Bandwidth Memory (HBM). The RL training process took 12 hours. 

F.2 Training Framework: verl 

We implemented our end-to-end training pipeline (SFT →

RLVR) using the verl 2. verl provides a modular architec-ture that allows for: 1. Hybrid Engine: Seamless switching between FSDP (Fully Sharded Data Parallel) for SFT and distributed PPO/GRPO orchestration for RL. 2. Throughput Optimization: Efficient management of the 32B model across 128 NPUs, achieving high tokens-per-second during the rollout phase of RLVR. 

F.3 Evaluation Protocol 

To ensure the robustness of our results, especially given the stochastic nature of LLM generation: 

• Sampling: For each test sample, we generate 3 indepen-dent responses using a temperature of 1.0. 

• Metrics: We report the average success rate (pass rate) across these 3 trials. A response is considered successful only if it satisfies 100% of the generated constraints as verified by the deterministic Python checkers. For benchmarks such as MIA-Bench and MMIF-Eval, which involve evaluating constraint satisfaction via an LLM judge, we employ GPT-4o as the automated evaluator to maintain methodological consistency with prior work. 

F.4 Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) 

The SFT stage serves as the behavioral cloning phase to initialize the models for subsequent reinforcement learning. We fine-tuned the Qwen3-VL (4B, 8B, and 32B) models using the following configurations Table 5.              

> 2https://github.com/verl-project/verl
> Configuration Value
> Optimizer AdamW ( β1= 0 .9, β 2= 0 .95 )Learning Rate 2×10 −5
> Learning Rate Scheduler Cosine decay Weight Decay 0.1 Global Batch Size 128 Precision BFloat16 Max Sequence Length 4096 tokens Training Epochs 2

Table 5: Hyper-parameters for SFT training.                

> Hyperparameter Value
> Data & Rollout Global Batch Size 128 Max Prompt/Resp. 2k / 4k Sampling Temp. τ1.0 Top-p0.6 Rollout Group Size G8RL Optimization Learning Rate 1×10 −6
> Optimizer AdamW Clip Ratio 0.28 KL Reference Loss 0.0 Weight Decay 0.01

Table 6: Hyperparameters for GRPO training. 

F.5 Reinforcement Learning from Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) 

Following SFT, we apply RLVR to further enhance the model’s instruction-following precision. We employ the 

Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) algorithm, which optimizes the policy by comparing rewards within a group of sampled responses, effectively reducing variance without an explicit critic model. We utilize the rule-based Python verifier. The reward is binary: R = 1 if all constraints are passed, and R = 0 otherwise. The Hyperparameter set-ting is shown in Table 6. 

F.6 Additional Baseline Comparisons 

To further validate the effectiveness of MIFS, we provide ad-ditional comparisons against existing Multimodal Instruction Following (MM-IF) and text-only RLVR baselines. It is im-portant to note the current scarcity of high-quality training data for MM-IF: while datasets like MM-IF-Instruct(Ding et al. 2025) support Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), there re-mains a lack of dedicated RLVR datasets in the multimodal domain. Existing RLVR resources such as RECAST(Guo et al. 2025b) and VerIF(Peng et al. 2025) are limited to text-only instructions, failing to address multimodal alignment challenges. Table 9 presents the performance on Qwen3-8B (text-only) and Qwen3-VL-8B (multimodal). On the text-only Qwen3-8B model, our method performs competitively with special-ized text-based RL methods like RECAST-RL. More impor-tantly, on the multimodal Qwen3-VL-8B, MIFS significantly outperforms all baselines. Specifically, MIFS-RL achieves a substantial gain of +8.13 points over the base model and sur-passes the SFT baseline (MM-IF-Instruct) by a wide margin, demonstrating the superiority of our RL-ready data construc-tion for complex multimodal instruction following. 

F.7 Human Audit of Code Verifier 

To validate the reliability of our automated code verifica-tion in response evaluation, we conducted a comprehensive human audit on a randomly sampled subset of the MIFS dataset. 

Audit Setup. We selected 50 MM-IF samples and gen-erated responses using Qwen3-VL-8B. The evaluation was performed by three human annotators (two NLP researchers and one Python-proficient student). We compared the binary pass/fail judgments of our automated code verifiers against the consensus judgment of the human auditors. 

Results . As shown in Table 7, the automated code verifier achieved a high Agreement Rate of 92.0% and a Precision of 97.22% with human experts. The low False Positive Rate (8.33%) indicates that the code verifier rarely accepts incor-rect response, ensuring the high-quality reward signal in the RL training. These results confirm that our code-based veri-fication is robust and aligns closely with human judgment.       

> Code: Pass Code: Fail Human: Pass 35 (TP) 3 (FN)
> Human: Fail 1 (FP) 11 (TN)
> Metrics Agreement: 92.0% | Precision: 97.22%

Table 7: Confusion Matrix: Automated Verifier vs. Human Judgment (N=50). Constraint Type Definition Example 

Keyword Inclusion Mandatory integration of specific lexical items. “Must include the words ’sustainability’ and ’inno-vation’.” Negative Constraint Prohibiting the use of specific words, phrases, or topics. “Do not use the word ’very’ or mention price de-tails.” Length Constraint Quantifiable limits on the number of characters, words, or sentences. “The response must be between 50 and 80 words long.” Structural Constraint Requirements regarding the organizational layout or com-ponents. “Format the response into three distinct bullet points.” Punctuation Constraint Rules governing the usage or exclusion of specific punc-tuation marks. “Each sentence must end with a semicolon instead of a period.” Positioning Constraint Placing specific content at predefined locations within the text. “The output must conclude with the phrase ’End of Report’.” Formatting & Style Visual styling (e.g., Markdown) or quantifiable stylistic markers. “Bold every occurrence of a numerical value in the text.” Grammar Constraint Restrictions on linguistic properties such as tense or per-son. “Write the entire response using only the passive voice.” 

Table 8: Definitions and Examples of Constraint Types in our Dataset. 

Dataset / Method MIABench MM-IFEval MIFS-Eval IFEval Average Qwen3-8B (Text-Only) 

Base - - - 85.77 -RECAST-SFT - - - 87.14 -RECAST-RL - - - 88.65 -VERIF-RL - - - 86.51 -

Qwen3-VL-8B (Multimodal) 

Base 91.16 62.67 74.54 81.15 77.38 MM-IFInstruct-SFT 92.96 64.85 76.39 84.47 79.66 ( ↑2.28) MIFS-SFT 93.25 64.71 77.65 86.26 80.47 (↑3.09) MIFS-RL 96.67 71.20 86.76 88.17 85.51 (↑8.13) MIFS-SFT+RL 97.02 72.40 88.20 88.80 86.61 (↑9.23) Table 9: Comparison with additional baselines. MIFS demonstrates superior performance in the multimodal setting compared to both standard SFT and text-only RL approaches.